Will

The great controversy over the freedom of
the will tends to overshadow the theory
of the will itself. For some thinkers the two
notions are inseparable. As the word "choice"
popularly connotes freedom in choosing be­
tween alternatives, so for them liberty belongs
to the very nature of the will. But others who
affirm that men can act freely or voluntarily
also deny that the will itself is ever free.
Still others who distinguish between volun­
tary and reflex actions-on the part of brute
animals as well as men-also distinguish be­
tween the voluntary and the free. They re­
serve freedom to men alone on the ground
that men alone have wills. Far from identi­
fying will with free will, they differentiate
between those acts of the will which are ne­
cessitated and those which are free.
It would appear from this sampling of con­
flicting opinions that the issue concerning free
will presupposes, and often conceals, diverse
theories of the will-different conceptions of
its nature, its various acts, and its relation to
other faculties. Those who affirm and those
who deny the will's freedom of action hardly
meet on that issue if they proceed from differ­
ent conceptions of what the will is and how
it operates.
The matter is further complicated by dif­
ferent conceptions of freedom. Even those
who define will in somewhat similar terms
conceive its liberty differently. As the chap­
ter on LIBERTY indicates, freedom has many
meanings-theological, metaphysical, psycho­
logical, moral, natural, and civiL What is called
free in one of these senses may not be so
regarded in another. But one thing is clear.
If, as Hobbes thinks, the only sense in which
freedom can be affirmed is that of natural or
political liberty-the sense in which a man can
do what he wills without restraint or compul­
sion-then the will is not free, for its freedom
depends on how its own acts are caused, or
how it causes other acts, not on how the acts it
causes are affected by outward circumstances
beyond its control.
The problem of the freedom of the will
seems, therefore, to be primarily psychological
and metaphysical. It requires us to consider
freedom in terms of cause and necessity. It ap­
peals to such distinctions as that between the
caused, the uncaused, and the self-caused, or
to the difference between the predetermined,
the contingent, and the spontaneous event. To
this extent the problem is metaphysical. But it
is psychological insofar as the kind of event
with which we are concerned is an interior act
of a living thing and, even more specifically, of
an intelligent being, a being which has mind
in some sense of that term. We do not ask
whether stones and vegetables have free will
because we do not usually suppose that they
have will. Even those who, like Aristotle, at­
tribute desire to all things or who, like William
James, find a striving toward goals in at least
all living things, do not refer to volition or
the voluntary in the absence of imagination
or thought.
The italicized words in the foregoing para­
graph indicate ideas which have the most fun­
damental bearing on the discussion of will,
and hence the relation of this to other chap­
ters. The chapters on CAUSE and NECESSITY
(and those on FATE and CHANCE) deal with
doctrines which both affect and are affected
by various theories of the will's freedom. But
if we are to postpone the question of free will
until the nature of will itself is considered,
